Node Monitoring Setup (#781)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/maintain-guides-how-to-monitor-your-node.md

---
id: maintain-guides-how-to-monitor-your-node
title: Monitor your node
sidebar_label: Monitor your node
---

> This guide will walk you through how to set up the [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) with [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor your node using Ubuntu 18.04.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will walk you through how to set up [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) with [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor your node using Ubuntu 18.04.
```

Reviewer: Any particular reason why not use the latest LTS release of 20.04?

## Preparation

First, create a user for Prometheus and Node Exporter without the possibility to log in.

```bash
useradd --no-create-home --shell /usr/sbin/nologin prometheus
useradd --no-create-home --shell /bin/false node_exporter
```

Create the directories required to store the configuration and executable files.

```bash
mkdir /etc/prometheus
mkdir /var/lib/prometheus
```

> Change the ownership of these directories to `prometheus` so that only prometheus can access to these them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change the ownership of these directories to `prometheus` so that only prometheus can access them.
```

```bash

> sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus

Reviewer: You use sudo here, but the above calls also need sudo. Either put sudo in all of them or in none of them (I recommend putting sudo, so we're explicit about elevated privileges on command execution).

Reviewer: Also recommend `chown`ing directories with the `-R` flag as a habit.

sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /var/lib/prometheus
```

> ## Installing & Configuring Node Exporter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Installing and Configuring Node Exporter
```

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps a short paragraph explaining what Node Exporter is, and why we need it if substrate node already exposes prometheus metrics on its own.

```bash
wget https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter/releases/download/v1.0.1/node_exporter-1.0.1.linux-amd64.tar.gz
```

```bash
tar xvf node_exporter-1.0.1.linux-amd64.tar.gz
```

```bash
cp node_exporter-1.0.1.linux-amd64/node_exporter /usr/local/bin
chown node_exporter:node_exporter /usr/local/bin/node_exporter
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: Consider either combining all these commands into one set, or put a little explanation above each describing what each does. They don't look good orphaned like this. Perhaps we could even write a bash script to do them all at once and abstract the instructions away a little.

rm -rf node_exporter-1.0.1.linux-amd64*
```

```bash
nano /etc/systemd/system/node_exporter.service
```

> 

Reviewer: Again no explanation - please explain why we're doing this and what this accomplishes.

```

```bash
systemctl enable node_exporter
```

## Installing & Configuring Prometheus

```bash
apt-get update && apt-get upgrade
wget https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/download/v2.20.1/prometheus-2.20.1.linux-amd64.tar.gz
tar xfz prometheus-*.tar.gz
cd prometheus-2.20.1.linux-amd64
```

```bash
cp ./prometheus /usr/local/bin/
cp ./promtool /usr/local/bin/
```

```bash
chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/prometheus
chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/promtool
```

```bash
cp -r ./consoles /etc/prometheus
cp -r ./console_libraries /etc/prometheus
```

```bash
chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/consoles
chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/console_libraries
```

```bash
cd .. && rm -rf prometheus*
```

```bash
nano /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
```

```bash
global:
  scrape_interval:     15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s

rule_files:
  # - "first.rules"
  # - "second.rules"

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9090']
  - job_name: 'node_exporter'
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9100']
```

> 

Reviewer: All of these code walls need to be described

---
id: maintain-guides-how-to-monitor-your-node
title: Monitor your node
sidebar_label: Monitor your node
---

This guide will walk you through how to set up [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) with
[Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor your node using Ubuntu 18.04.

> As Substrate-based chain would expose the data including the height of the chain, the number of
> connected peers to your node, CPU, and memory usage of your machine, etc. To monitor these data,
> Prometheus is capable of collecting metrics to allow Grafana for displaying it on the dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Substrate-based chain exposes data such as the height of the chain, the number of
connected peers to your node, CPU, memory usage of your machine, and more. To monitor this data,
Prometheus is used to collect metrics and Grafana allows for displaying it on the dashboard.
```

## Preparation

> First, create a user for Prometheus and Node Exporter without the possibility to log in.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by "without the possibility to log in"? Do you mean we create users without home directories? Be more explicit here.

```bash
sudo useradd --no-create-home --shell /usr/sbin/nologin prometheus
sudo useradd --no-create-home --shell /bin/false node_exporter
```

> Create the directories required to store the configuration and executable files.

Reviewer 2: Does Prometheus not do this when you install it? Just curious, because it's kinda surprising that it does not.

Author: good catch

Reviewer: If you do the manual install as documented here (unzipping the files and copying to `/usr/bin` then it does not, and you have to manually create them. Prometheus has no install script to do this for the user.

```bash
sudo mkdir /etc/prometheus
sudo mkdir /var/lib/prometheus
```

Change the ownership of these directories to `prometheus` so that only prometheus can access them.

```bash
sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus
sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /var/lib/prometheus
```

> ## Installing & Configuring Prometheus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Installing and Configuring Prometheus
```

> After setting up an environment, update the OS, and install the latest Prometheus. You can check the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After setting up the environment, update your OS, and install the latest Prometheus. You can check the
```

latest release by going to their GitHub repository under the

> [release](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/) page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[releases](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/) page.
```

```bash
sudo apt-get update && apt-get upgrade
wget https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/download/v2.20.1/prometheus-2.20.1.linux-amd64.tar.gz
tar xfz prometheus-*.tar.gz
cd prometheus-2.20.1.linux-amd64
```

The following two binaries are in the directory:

> - Prometheus - Prometheus main binary file

Reviewer 2: Is the Prometheus binary Uppercase?

```bash
sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/prometheus
sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/promtool
```

Copy the `consoles` and `console_libraries` directories to `/etc/prometheus`

```bash
sudo cp -r ./consoles /etc/prometheus
sudo cp -r ./console_libraries /etc/prometheus
```

Change the ownership of these directories to the `prometheus` user.

```bash
sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/consoles
sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/console_libraries
```

Once everything is done, run this command to remove `prometheus` directory.

```bash
cd .. && rm -rf prometheus*
```

Before using Prometheus, it needs some configuration. Create a YAML configuration file named
`prometheus.yml` by running the command below.

```bash
sudo nano /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
```

The configuration file is divided into three parts which are global, rule_files, and scrape_configs.

`scrape_interval` defines how often Prometheus scrapes targets, while `evaluation_interval` controls
how often the software will evaluate rules.

`rule_files` block contains information of the location of any rules we want the Prometheus server
to load.

> `scape_configs` contains the information which resources Prometheus monitors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`scrape_configs` contains the information which resources Prometheus monitors.
```

The configuration file should look like this below:

```bash
global:
  scrape_interval:     15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s

rule_files:
  # - "first.rules"

>   # - "second.rules"

Reviewer 2: Delete commented lines if they are not relevant.

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9090']
  - job_name: 'substrate_node'
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9165']
```

> With the above configuration file, the first exporter is Prometheus that monitors itself. As we want

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the above configuration file, the first exporter is the one that Prometheus exports to monitor itself. As we want
```

to have more precise information about the state of the Prometheus server we reduced the

> `scrape_interval` to 5 sec for this job. The parameters `static_configs` and `targets` determine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`scrape_interval` to 5 seconds for this job. The parameters `static_configs` and `targets` determine
```

interface or not. If it is working, simply exit the process by pressing on `CTRL + C` on your
Prometheus console.

Next, we would like to automatically start the server during the boot process, so we have to create
a new `systemd` configuration file with the following config.

```bash
sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/prometheus.service
```

```bash
[Unit]
  Description=Prometheus Monitoring
  Wants=network-online.target
  After=network-online.target

[Service]
  User=prometheus
  Group=prometheus
  Type=simple
  ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/prometheus \
  --config.file /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
  --storage.tsdb.path /var/lib/prometheus/ \
  --web.console.templates=/etc/prometheus/consoles \
  --web.console.libraries=/etc/prometheus/console_libraries
  ExecReload=/bin/kill -HUP $MAINPID

[Install]
  WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

Once the file is saved, execute the command below to use reload the `systemd` and enable the service
so that it will be loaded automatically during starting the OS.

```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload && systemctl enable prometheus && systemctl start prometheus
```

## Installing Grafana

> In order to visualize those metrics of your node, you can use Grafana to query the Prometheus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to visualize your node metrics, you can use Grafana to query the Prometheus
```

server. Run the following commands to install it first.

```bash
sudo sudo apt-get install -y adduser libfontconfig1
wget https://dl.grafana.com/oss/release/grafana_7.1.3_amd64.deb
sudo dpkg -i grafana_7.1.3_amd64.deb
```

If everything is fine, start the Grafana server and access it by going to the
`http://SERVER_IP_ADDRESS:3000/login`. The default user and password is admin/admin.

```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload && sudo systemctl enable grafana-server && sudo systemctl start grafana-server
```

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/1-grafana-login.png)

> In order to visualize those metrics, click setting to configure the `Data Sources` first.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to visualize the node metrics, click setting to configure the `Data Sources` first.
```

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/2-add-data-source.png)

> Click `Add data source` to choose where the data coming from.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Click `Add data source` to choose where the data is coming from.
```

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/2-add-data-source-2.png)

Select `Prometheus`.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/3-select-prometheus.png)

The only thing you need to input is the `URL` that is `https://localhost:9090` and then click
`Save & Test`. If you see the result is `Data source is working`, your connection is configured
correctly.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/4-configure-data-source.png)

Next, import the dashboard that lets you visualize your node data. Simply go to the menu bar on the
left and mouse hover "+" then select `Import`.

> `Import via grafana.com` - It allows you to use someone who created the dashboard and make it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Import via grafana.com` - It allows you to use a dashboard that someone else has created and made
```

> public. You can check what other dashboards available via

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
public. You can check what other dashboards are available via
```

---
id: maintain-guides-how-to-monitor-your-node
title: Monitor your node
sidebar_label: Monitor your node
---

This guide will walk you through how to set up [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) with

> [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor your node using Ubuntu 18.04.

Reviewer: Why not Ubuntu 20.04? At the very least we should try to run the same process on 20.04 as well to make sure both OS' are supported.

Author: We don't know how many percentages of validators are using 18.04 or 20.04. That's not a critical thing at the moment, so we can test it later instead.

Reviewer 2: 20.04 is the new LTS right?

Author: I think so

Reviewer: Yes. I can confirm it works on 20.04, I've been testing on that one, so let's update this part.

```suggestion
[Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor your node using Ubuntu 18.04 or 20.04.
```

A Substrate-based chain exposes data such as the height of the chain, the number of connected peers
to your node, CPU, memory usage of your machine, and more. To monitor this data, Prometheus is used

> to collect metrics and Grafana allows for displaying it on the dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to collect metrics and Grafana allows for displaying them on the dashboard.
```

## Preparation

> First, create a user for Prometheus by adding `--no-create-home` flag to not allow `prometheus` to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create a user for Prometheus by adding the `--no-create-home` flag to disallow `prometheus` from
```

> log in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
logging in.
```

```bash
sudo useradd --no-create-home --shell /usr/sbin/nologin prometheus
```

Create the directories required to store the configuration and executable files.

```bash
sudo mkdir /etc/prometheus
sudo mkdir /var/lib/prometheus
```

Change the ownership of these directories to `prometheus` so that only prometheus can access them.

```bash

> sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus
```

> sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /var/lib/prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /var/lib/prometheus
```

```

## Installing and Configuring Prometheus

After setting up the environment, update your OS, and install the latest Prometheus. You can check
the latest release by going to their GitHub repository under the
[releases](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/) page.

```bash
sudo apt-get update && apt-get upgrade
wget https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/download/v2.20.1/prometheus-2.20.1.linux-amd64.tar.gz
tar xfz prometheus-*.tar.gz
cd prometheus-2.20.1.linux-amd64
```

The following two binaries are in the directory:

> - Prometheus - Prometheus main binary file

Reviewer: This binary is lowecase

```suggestion
- prometheus - Prometheus main binary file
```

license) are in the directory:

- consoles
- console_libraries

Copy the executable files to the `/usr/local/bin/` directory.

```bash
sudo cp ./prometheus /usr/local/bin/
sudo cp ./promtool /usr/local/bin/
```

Change the ownership of these files to the `prometheus` user.

```bash
sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/prometheus
sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/promtool
```

Copy the `consoles` and `console_libraries` directories to `/etc/prometheus`

```bash
sudo cp -r ./consoles /etc/prometheus
sudo cp -r ./console_libraries /etc/prometheus
```

Change the ownership of these directories to the `prometheus` user.

```bash
sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/consoles
sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/console_libraries
```

Once everything is done, run this command to remove `prometheus` directory.

```bash
cd .. && rm -rf prometheus*
```

Before using Prometheus, it needs some configuration. Create a YAML configuration file named
`prometheus.yml` by running the command below.

```bash
sudo nano /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
```

> The configuration file is divided into three parts which are global, rule_files, and scrape_configs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration file is divided into three parts which are `global`, `rule_files`, and `scrape_configs`.
```

`scrape_interval` defines how often Prometheus scrapes targets, while `evaluation_interval` controls
how often the software will evaluate rules.

`rule_files` block contains information of the location of any rules we want the Prometheus server
to load.

> `scrape_configs` contains the information which resources Prometheus monitors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `scrape_interval` defines how often Prometheus scrapes targets, while `evaluation_interval` controls
how often the software will evaluate rules.

- `rule_files` block contains information of the location of any rules we want the Prometheus server
to load.

- `scrape_configs` contains the information which resources Prometheus monitors.
```

The configuration file should look like this below:

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

global:
  scrape_interval:     15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s

rule_files:
  # - "first.rules"
  # - "second.rules"

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9090']
  - job_name: 'substrate_node'
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9165']
```

With the above configuration file, the first exporter is the one that Prometheus exports to monitor
itself. As we want to have more precise information about the state of the Prometheus server we
reduced the `scrape_interval` to 5 seconds for this job. The parameters `static_configs` and

> `targets` determine where the exporters are running. While the second exporter is capturing the data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`targets` determine where the exporters are running. The second exporter is capturing the data
```

from your node, and the port by default is `9165`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

You can check the validity of this configuration file by running `promtool check config /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`.

```

Save the configuration file and change the ownership of the file to `prometheus` user.

```bash
sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
```

## Starting Prometheus

> To test the Prometheus is setup properly, execute the following command to start it as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test that Prometheus is set up properly, execute the following command to start it as the
```

`prometheus` user.

```bash
sudo -u prometheus /usr/local/bin/prometheus --config.file /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml --storage.tsdb.path /var/lib/prometheus/ --web.console.templates=/etc/prometheus/consoles --web.console.libraries=/etc/prometheus/console_libraries
```

The following messages indicate the status of the server. If you see the following messages, your

> server is setup properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
server is set up properly.
```

level=info ts=2020-08-12T21:39:05.459Z caller=head.go:661 component=tsdb msg="Replaying WAL, this may take a while"
level=info ts=2020-08-12T21:39:05.464Z caller=head.go:713 component=tsdb msg="WAL segment loaded" segment=0 maxSegment=0
level=info ts=2020-08-12T21:39:05.464Z caller=head.go:716 component=tsdb msg="WAL replay completed" checkpoint_replay_duration=26.822µs wal_replay_duration=4.649295ms total_replay_duration=4.737874ms
level=info ts=2020-08-12T21:39:05.466Z caller=main.go:700 fs_type=EXT4_SUPER_MAGIC
level=info ts=2020-08-12T21:39:05.466Z caller=main.go:701 msg="TSDB started"
level=info ts=2020-08-12T21:39:05.466Z caller=main.go:805 msg="Loading configuration file" filename=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
level=info ts=2020-08-12T21:39:05.467Z caller=main.go:833 msg="Completed loading of configuration file" filename=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
level=info ts=2020-08-12T21:39:05.467Z caller=main.go:652 msg="Server is ready to receive web requests."
```

Go to `http://SERVER_IP_ADDRESS:9090/graph` to check whether you are able to access the Prometheus
interface or not. If it is working, simply exit the process by pressing on `CTRL + C` on your

> Prometheus console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interface or not. If it is working, exit the process by pressing on `CTRL + C`.
```

Reviewer: The word "simply" should be avoided. It might also be confusing to people - what is the "prometheus console"? It's better to say terminal, or just omit it since it's implied.

Next, we would like to automatically start the server during the boot process, so we have to create
a new `systemd` configuration file with the following config.

```bash
sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/prometheus.service
```

```bash
[Unit]
  Description=Prometheus Monitoring
  Wants=network-online.target
  After=network-online.target

[Service]
  User=prometheus
  Group=prometheus
  Type=simple
  ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/prometheus \
  --config.file /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
  --storage.tsdb.path /var/lib/prometheus/ \
  --web.console.templates=/etc/prometheus/consoles \
  --web.console.libraries=/etc/prometheus/console_libraries
  ExecReload=/bin/kill -HUP $MAINPID

[Install]
  WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

Once the file is saved, execute the command below to use reload the `systemd` and enable the service

> so that it will be loaded automatically during starting the OS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the file is saved, execute the command below to reload `systemd` and enable the service
so that it will be loaded automatically during the operating system's startup.
```

```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload && systemctl enable prometheus && systemctl start prometheus
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Prometheus should be running now, and you should be able to access its front again end by re-visiting `IP_ADDRESS:9090/`.

```

## Installing Grafana

In order to visualize your node metrics, you can use Grafana to query the Prometheus server. Run the
following commands to install it first.

```bash

> sudo sudo apt-get install -y adduser libfontconfig1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo apt-get install -y adduser libfontconfig1
```

wget https://dl.grafana.com/oss/release/grafana_7.1.3_amd64.deb
sudo dpkg -i grafana_7.1.3_amd64.deb
```

> If everything is fine, start the Grafana server and access it by going to the

Reviewer: > start the Grafana server

I know it says in the output of the command `sudo /bin/systemctl start grafana-server` to start it, but maybe we should be explicit.

`http://SERVER_IP_ADDRESS:3000/login`. The default user and password is admin/admin.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Now configure Grafana to auto-start on boot.

> Note: If you want to change the port on which Grafana runs (3000 is a popular port), edit the file `/usr/share/grafana/conf/defaults.ini` with a command like `sudo vim /usr/share/grafana/conf/defaults.ini` and change the `http_port` value to something else. Then restart grafana with `sudo systemctl restart grafana-server`.

```

```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload && sudo systemctl enable grafana-server && sudo systemctl start grafana-server
```

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/1-grafana-login.png)

> In order to visualize the node metrics, click setting to configure the `Data Sources` first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to visualize the node metrics, click _settings_ to configure the `Data Sources` first.
```

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/2-add-data-source.png)

Click `Add data source` to choose where the data is coming from.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/2-add-data-source-2.png)

Select `Prometheus`.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/3-select-prometheus.png)

The only thing you need to input is the `URL` that is `https://localhost:9090` and then click

> `Save & Test`. If you see the result is `Data source is working`, your connection is configured

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Save & Test`. If you see `Data source is working`, your connection is configured
```

correctly.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/4-configure-data-source.png)

> Next, import the dashboard that lets you visualize your node data. Simply go to the menu bar on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, import the dashboard that lets you visualize your node data. Go to the menu bar on the
```

left and mouse hover "+" then select `Import`.

`Import via grafana.com` - It allows you to use a dashboard that someone else has created and made
public. You can check what other dashboards are available via
[https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards). In this guide, we

> use "My Polkadot Metrics", so input "12425" under the id field and click `Load`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use ["My Polkadot Metrics"](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/12425), so input "12425" under the id field and click `Load`.
```

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/5-import-dashboard.png)

Once it has been loaded, make sure to select "Prometheus" in the Prometheus dropdown list. Then
click `Import`.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/5-import-dashboard-2.png)

> In the meantime, start your Polkadot node with by running `./polkadot`. If everything is done

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the meantime, start your Polkadot node by running `./polkadot`. If everything is done
```

correctly, you should be able to monitor your node's performance such as the current block height,

> CPU, memory usage, etc on the Grafana dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CPU, memory usage, etc. on the Grafana dashboard.
```

In order to visualize the node metrics, click _settings_ to configure the `Data Sources` first.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/2-add-data-source.png)

Click `Add data source` to choose where the data is coming from.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/2-add-data-source-2.png)

Select `Prometheus`.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/3-select-prometheus.png)

The only thing you need to input is the `URL` that is `https://localhost:9090` and then click
`Save & Test`. If you see `Data source is working`, your connection is configured correctly.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/4-configure-data-source.png)

Next, import the dashboard that lets you visualize your node data. Go to the menu bar on the left
and mouse hover "+" then select `Import`.

`Import via grafana.com` - It allows you to use a dashboard that someone else has created and made
public. You can check what other dashboards are available via
[https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards). In this guide, we
use ["My Polkadot Metrics"](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/12425), so input "12425" under
the id field and click `Load`.

> ![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/5-import-dashboard.png)

Reviewer 3: is it possible to make these vertical images a bit smaller? They're quite large IMO

Once it has been loaded, make sure to select "Prometheus" in the Prometheus dropdown list. Then
click `Import`.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/5-import-dashboard-2.png)

> In the meantime, start your Polkadot node by running `./polkadot`. If everything is done correctly,

Reviewer: Keep in mind that the dashboard uses metrics names specific to Substrate, and will not work on Polkadot, or vice versa, I don't remember which. So we should tell users how to modify the dash so it reads the metrics properly.

Author: ah The dashboard metric is used for Polkadot. Why didn't it?  🙃

Reviewer: If it works on Polkadot and Kusama OOTB then superb 👍 Substrate users can figure out that they need to change metric prefixes

```

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/1-grafana-login.png)

In order to visualize the node metrics, click _settings_ to configure the `Data Sources` first.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/2-add-data-source.png)

Click `Add data source` to choose where the data is coming from.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/2-add-data-source-2.png)

Select `Prometheus`.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/3-select-prometheus.png)

The only thing you need to input is the `URL` that is `https://localhost:9090` and then click
`Save & Test`. If you see `Data source is working`, your connection is configured correctly.

![grafana-1](assets/guides/how-to-monitor/4-configure-data-source.png)

Next, import the dashboard that lets you visualize your node data. Go to the menu bar on the left
and mouse hover "+" then select `Import`.

`Import via grafana.com` - It allows you to use a dashboard that someone else has created and made
public. You can check what other dashboards are available via
[https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards). In this guide, we

> use ["My Polkadot Metrics"](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/12425), so input "12425" under

Reviewer 4: I know it's the only dashboard that is available on grafana.com, but it is a poor quality dashboard. The CPU and memory graphs won't work because we've now removed these metrics, and the tasks graphs make no sense.

We're maintaining some more "official" and thorough dashboards here: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/.maintain/monitoring/grafana-dashboards

Author: awesome! will check it out.

Reviewer 4: None of them are a straight out-of-the-box experience unfortunately

Reviewer: @ansonla3 let's teach people how to import these before we merge this? A section showing how to load one of these up perhaps?

Reviewer 5: If this is still being worked on, can we merge and add the dashboards in later as a separate PR?  @ansonla3

Author: @laboon  yes. let's merge it first. will submit another PR very soon
